Parsing emails in Python (#2931)
section-engineering-education/engineering-education: content/articles/email-parser-python/index.md

### Parsing emails in Python

Perhaps you are a machine learning engineer trying to build an email spam classifier and you want to get some way of pre-processing the emails or you are trying to look for some correlations between some emails, you will in one way or another have to parse the emails first. We will look at how to do that using Python. Python has the `email` module containing methods to help us achieve this.

> #### Prerequisites

Reviewer: Use H3 and beyond. You have used H4 and beyond.

> The following are the pre-requisites for this article

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following are the prerequisites for this article:
- An understanding of Python.
- Jupyter notebook installed or access to Google Colab.
```

An understanding of Python.
Jupyter notebook installed or access to Google Colab.

> We will use Jupyter notebooks in this article. You may use regular Python files for the code executions.

A Colab notebook with the codes is found [here](https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1nDz58G4cDukqukOlPRVST-jKBK0AyMwa?usp=sharing).

#### Getting started

We will parse emails from the SpamAssassin website then look at their structure and contents. The site contains spam and normal emails. We will try and look at their structures using the metrics highlighted. 

First, create a notebook called **email_parser.ipynb** or your preferred name.

> Then, create a cell and add the packages we need.

Reviewer: Don't mention steps that involve creating a cell. You may rephrase it as... In a new cell, import the required packages.

```python
import os
import tarfile
import urllib.request
import email
import email.policy
from collections import Counter
import urlextract
```

> After that, create another cell and paste this code for getting the emails from the SpamAssassin website.

Reviewer: Creating a new cell is redundant. Rephrase it.

```python
#the root url
EMAILS_URL_ROOT = "http://spamassassin.apache.org/old/publiccorpus/"
#the emails url
NORMALS_URL = EMAILS_URL_ROOT + "20030228_easy_ham.tar.bz2"
SPAMS_URL = EMAILS_URL_ROOT + "20030228_spam.tar.bz2"
#datasets path
SPAM_PATH = os.path.join("datasets", "spam")

#method for fetching the emails from the url
def fetch_emails(NORMALS_URL=NORMALS_URL, SPAMS_URL=SPAMS_URL, spams_path=SPAM_PATH):
  #creating a directory
    if not os.path.isdir(spams_path):
        os.makedirs(spams_path)
        for filename, url in (("ham.tar.bz2", NORMALS_URL),("spam.tar.bz2", SPAMS_URL)):
            path = os.path.join(spams_path, filename)
            #checking if there is a file
            if not os.path.isfile(path):
                urllib.request.urlretrieve(url, path)
                #extracting
            email_tar_file = tarfile.open(path)
            email_tar_file.extractall(path=spams_path)
            email_tar_file.close()
```

>  We set the paths and the url in the constants. In the `fetch_emails()` method, we check if the directory is present using the `isdir()` method of the `os` module. If it is not there, we create a new one using the `makedirs()` method. We create two paths for normal and spam emails.

Reviewer: Break this para into multiple sub paragraphs

 We then create the file directory if it is not present and retrieve it using the `urlretrieve()` method.

>  After that, we open the tar files and extract them.

Reviewer: Don't use after that. Instead use, Once done.

We can look at a sample of a normal email in the next cell.

```python
print(normal_emails[42].get_content().strip())
```

#### Viewing the structures of the emails

In this part, we will look at how to get the structure of the emails and further look at the common types of structures for spam and normal emails.

Paste this in the next cell.

```python
'''Getting the most common email structures'''
def get_structures(email):
  #if its plain text return text/plain
    if isinstance(email, str):
        return email
    email_payload = email.get_email_payload()
    #if the payload is a list then its probably a multipart
    #return a multipart thereafter
    if isinstance(email_payload, list):
        return "multipart({})".format(", ".join([
            get_structures(sub_email)
            for sub_email in email_payload
        ]))
    else:
        return email.get_content_type()
#function for counting the types
def type_counter(emails):
    our_count = Counter()
    for email in emails:
        structure = get_structures(email)
        our_count[structure] += 1
    return our_count
```

In this code, we have two methods, `get_structures()` and `type_counter()`.

> For the `get_structures()`, we check for the structure. If it is a normal text email, we return `text/plain,` but if it's a multipart type of email, we return multipart, all the parts it contains. Note also that recursion is used if there are many email structures in the sub-emails of that email.

Reviewer: This para is not clear. Be precise in what you want to convey. This is done by:
1. Explaining the entire concept and not assuming the reader knows some pre-requisite knowledge'
2. Breaking down paras into smaller sentences.

> For any other email structure we display it by return the emails content type(`get_content_type()`).

Reviewer: You use for at the beginning of the sentences very frequently. Use better words to get in a sense of flow.

#the root url
EMAILS_URL_ROOT = "http://spamassassin.apache.org/old/publiccorpus/"
#the emails url
NORMALS_URL = EMAILS_URL_ROOT + "20030228_easy_ham.tar.bz2"
SPAMS_URL = EMAILS_URL_ROOT + "20030228_spam.tar.bz2"
#datasets path
SPAM_PATH = os.path.join("datasets", "spam")

#method for fetching the emails from the url
def fetch_emails(NORMALS_URL=NORMALS_URL, SPAMS_URL=SPAMS_URL, spams_path=SPAM_PATH):
  #creating a directory
    if not os.path.isdir(spams_path):
        os.makedirs(spams_path)
        for filename, url in (("ham.tar.bz2", NORMALS_URL),("spam.tar.bz2", SPAMS_URL)):
            path = os.path.join(spams_path, filename)
            #checking if there is a file
            if not os.path.isfile(path):
                urllib.request.urlretrieve(url, path)
                #extracting
            email_tar_file = tarfile.open(path)
            email_tar_file.extractall(path=spams_path)
            email_tar_file.close()
```
We set the paths and the URLs as constants. Then, in the `fetch_emails()` method, we check if the directory is present using the `isdir()` method of the `os` module. If the directory is not present, we create a new one using the `makedirs()` method.
 

> We create two paths needed for normal and spam emails to store the emails.

Reviewer: It is better to call the classification task spam vs. ham instead of spam vs. normal emails. Change the name of folders and all references to ham messages as normal messages.

        return email.get_content_type()
        
#function for counting the types
def type_counter(emails):
    our_count = Counter()
    for email in emails:
        structure = get_structures(email)
        our_count[structure] += 1
    return our_count
```

In this code, we have two methods, `get_structures()` and `type_counter()`.

In the `get_structures()` function, we check the structure. If it is a normal text email, we return `text/plain,` but if it's a multipart type of email, we return multipart, all the parts it contains. Note also that recursion is used if there are many email structures in the sub-emails of that email.
For any other email structure we display it by return the emails content type(`get_content_type()`).

For the `type_counter()` method, we check how many email structure types are gotten in the spam and normal emails, e.g. `'text/plain', 2409`. So we first initiate a counter then count them for every similar structure.

We can display one for normal emails using this code:

```python
print(structures_counter(normal_emails))
```

We check the most common using the `most_common()` method.

```python
print(structures_counter(spam_emails).most_common())
```

>  We should see the output as shown below:

Reviewer: Instead of just pasting the output, let us know why we are seeing what we are seeing. Do this regularly for all outputs that you want to discuss.

```bash
[('text/plain', 2409), ('multipart(text/plain, application/pgp-signature)', 66), ('multipart(text/plain, text/html)', 8), ('multipart(text/plain, text/plain)', 4), ('multipart(text/plain)', 3), ('multipart(text/plain, application/octet-stream)', 2), ('multipart(text/plain, text/enriched)', 1), ('multipart(text/plain, application/ms-tnef, text/plain)', 1), ('multipart(multipart(text/plain, text/plain, text/plain), application/pgp-signature)', 1), ('multipart(text/plain, video/mng)', 1), ('multipart(text/plain, multipart(text/plain))', 1), ('multipart(text/plain, application/x-pkcs7-signature)', 1), ('multipart(text/plain, multipart(text/plain, text/plain), text/rfc822-headers)', 1), ('multipart(text/plain, multipart(text/plain, text/plain), multipart(multipart(text/plain, application/x-pkcs7-signature)))', 1), ('multipart(text/plain, application/x-java-applet)', 1)]
```
We then view the headers and their values using:

```python
for header, value in spam_emails[0].items():
    print(header,":",value)
```

### Conclusion

> In this article, we looked at getting the emails, setting the paths, extracting them, and parsing them.

Reviewer: Can you summarise in an in-depth manner. This isn't sufficient.
